# FemalePantHoots
The data and code for our analysis of sex and community specific effects on chimpanzee pant-hooting behaviour

Abstract
An interplay between biological and social factors drive vocal communication in complex and dynamic animal societies. Chimpanzee pant-hoots are long-distance vocalisations that encode a range of information and are frequently used to mediate social interactions. However, pant-hoot research has traditionally focused on male chimpanzees, and very little is known about how female chimpanzees use and respond to this call. To investigate how females' unique biological and social traits may affect the use of pant-hoot calls, we conducted focal individual follows on wild Eastern chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes schweinfurthii) from two communities in the Budongo Forest Reserve, Uganda. We collected behavioural data on all pant-hoots produced and received by mature males and females together with information about the socio-ecological context and individual factors. We found that females called less frequently than males, even when controlling for the number of opportunities to respond to a pant-hoot with a pant-hoot. Some factors were equally predictive of whether a male or female would pant-hoot in response to hearing pant-hoots, e.g., their presence in a feeding context; while, some factors predicted male and female responding differently. Male and female chimpanzees were more likely pant-hoot in response to respond to pant-hoots when they heard at least one pant-hoot from within their own party, but the increased likelihood of responding as compared to when no pant-hoots were heard from within their party, was stronger for females than males. Male chimpanzees were less likely to pant-hoot in response to pant-hoots respond when the alpha male was present in their party, while presence of the alpha male in their party did not impact likelihood to respond in female chimpanzees. Female chimpanzees were also less likely to respond to pant-hoots when in maximal oestrous. We also found that females from two neighbouring communities varied in their likelihood to respond differently, depending on the behavioural context. Our findings suggest that pant-hoots are central to the communication of both male and female chimpanzees and are, to an extent, used and responded to in sex-specific ways and sensitiveg to socio-ecological factors, supporting the argument that pant-hoot calls are an important and flexible aspect of chimpanzee vocal behaviour in both sexes.

